- In The Bronx, one of the
number one diet-related diseases
is Type 2 Diabetes.
Everyone knows a family
member or friend or colleague
who suffers from
Type 2 Diabetes,
which can be prevented.
My brother had Type 2 Diabetes.
My brother, at one time, was
on 30 different medications.
I told him, I says,
look, you have hypertension,
you have heart disease.
I said, we can work out
together, we can do exercise.
We can change diet.
We'll work it together.
February 2010,
that was it.
He passed away.
So I firsthand know the
effects of having a person
with Diabetes in my family,
and it was my brother.
This is The Tale of Two
Cities, here in The Bronx.
We are surrounded
by unhealthy food.
We have the bodegas.
You open the door,
and the first thing that
hits you are the racks
of cookies and cakes
and candies and sodas.
(somber music)
And then you go in to more
affluent neighborhoods,
and I walk into the store
and there are the vegetables.
Here are the healthy
food options.
But the question I ask is: why?
Why does it have
to be like that?
Why don't people
have access to food?
Why is it that they can't
afford cold, fresh vegetables?
Why is it that supermarkets
or other stores don't wanna come
into low-income neighborhoods?
And so people are now calling
our community food deserts.
It's like, wait a second.
You're getting it wrong,
because we do have food.
What we don't have is
healthy food options.
I moved to The
Bronx back in 1985.
Across the street
was an empty lot.
And I see a man with
a shovel and a pick.
He says, I'm thinkin'
about putting a garden.
Woo!
I was so excited!
I said, ooh, can I help?
I was so excited, because,
a garden?
Wow!
That would make the neighborhood
really, really look good.
When I first put that
tomato seed in the ground,
I was mesmerized by the
fact that it grew on a vine.
My relationship to a tomato
was that it was in the store.
I took it off the vine
and I bit into it,
and it just changed my world.
That taste of sunshine, of
juiciness, of sweetness.
This year we're
celebrating 30 years.
From an empty lot
full of garbage
to, now, a community garden
which is the glue
of this community.
(uplifting music)
Hey, girls!
Y'all hungry?
(chickens clucking)
No fighting!
- [Neighbor] Oh, yeah,
wait 'til you find more out
about what happened
to this garden.
You'll be like, I'm
happy all the time!
- Hi!
Hi, everybody!
So, I'm the farmer here at
The Garden of Happiness.
How many people eat food?
How many people
eat healthy food?
What are you not allowed to do?
- Eat junk.
- Excellent.
Eat junk.
So when we talk about junk,
what's junk?
(children all talking at
once...candy, burgers...)
You know what happens
when people eat a lot
of stuff with sugar?
- You get like--
- Diabetes?
- Diabetes!
That's a big word, Diabetes.
Come on, let's go
see the chickens.
- [Children] Yay!
- We gotta go, we're
goin' to see the chickens.
We gotta make chicken noise.
(everyone clucks)
When you're starting to
see adult onset Diabetes
in children, then that's an
alarm that needs to go off.
This is directly
related to diet.
I live in a community with
limited access to growing food.
I'm still marginalized because
of the color of my skin.
I need to be actively engaging
on breaking down those barriers
and working on some of
the injustices that I see.
It's time to go to the market.
All right.
One thing that the
community takes pride of is
that we're at their service.
And I have plums.
(bags rustling)
- Those tomatoes,
how do you eat them?
- Just slice 'em.
- [Customer] And just
eat them regular?
- Just eat 'em regular.
- [Customer] I wanna
live a little longer.
- All right, have a blessed day.
- You, too, darlin'.
(kids clucking and laughing)
- In the garden, I just
want people to understand
where their food comes from.
We are surrounded by
fast food restaurants.
With the garden,
we have a choice
to be able to grow
healthy food options.
Do you see healthy food
in the garden here?
- Yes!
- Where's the healthy
food in the garden?
- Over there!
- Over there?
Over here?